---
title: "Create Dashboards that tells a Story"
date: 2024-09-11T01:00:00Z
image: /images/post/post-1.png
categories: ["storytelling", "power bi","dashboard"]
featured: true
draft: false
---

Dashboards are more than just visual displays of data, they are tools for telling a story with data.
Guiding users that lead to informed descision making, Power BI offers robust capablities to turn raw data into interactive compelling dashboards.

## Why storytelling with Data important?

Today's world is rich with Data, this Data needs to be interpreted and communicated in ways that provide context and insights. Storytelling through dashboards helps:

- Simplify complex Data.
- Highlight key trends and outliers.
- Direct attention.
- Drive action.

## Story driven dashboards

Start by defining the what questions, these should align with the business strategy.

- What KPI, KBQ, or metrics that you want to track / answer.
- Who is the audience.
- What actions should be taken based on insights.

A dashboard for a sales team might focus on tracking slaes performance across different regions, while a dahsboard for executives may focus on business health like revenure growth
and profitability.

## Choose the right visuals

Not all visuals are created equal, selecting the right one is key to telling an effective data stroy.
Choose the best one that conveys the insight you're aiming to highlight.

- Bar / Column charts: Best for comparing categories, like sales by region or products.
- Line Charts: Ideal for showing trends over time, such as revenure growt.h
- Maps: Good for visualizing geograhpical Data.
- KPIs and Cards: Direct indications of performance, such as total sales.
- Pie / Donut: Use sparingling

Remember to avoid over crowding your dashboard with too many visuals.Stick to 4-6 visual that clearly tell a story.
Use a headline, clear visual and bring in a narrative.

## Create a logical flow

A well designed dashboard should have a clear flow, guiding the users through the Data in a logical order.

- Overview / high-level metrics: overall view of key KPIs or metrics that that gives immediate understanding of the broader buisness context.
- Detailed views: Drill downs / throughs into specific metrics to provide context.
- Filters and Interactivity: Use of slicers and filerts and other intereactive elements to let the users explore the data.

## Colors and Desgin

The visuals and colors used plays a big roll in guiding the narrative

- Use colors wisely: These should be used to highlight the imprtant metrics or trends, stick to 2-3 main colors that align with your brand or story
- Avoid Clutter: Clean, minimalist design helps keep the user focused on what matters.
- Align Visuals: Consitency in alignment , sizem and spacing improves readability.

## Annotations and text for context

Numbers alone rarely tell the full story. Adding annotations or text boxes to explain key insights or outliers can help users understand the implications of the data.
Example: A specific region has a sudden spike in sales, add a note explaining what might have caused it (e.g., a successful marketing campaign or new product launch).

## Test and iterate

Test your dashboard with actual users, Get feedback on how easy it is to understand and navigate.

- Does the dashboard guide users to the key insights?
- Are there any areas where the narrative is not clear?
- Do users need additional visuals or information to understand the data?

Use feedback to refine your dashboard.


## Conclusion

- Keep it simple: Less is often more. Do not overwhelm the users with to much information
- Be selective with data: Focus on the metrics that matter to your audience, business stratergy. Not every piece of data is needed
- Encourage intereactivty: Lets users explore the data

A Well crafted dashboard is more that just a collection of charts and graphs, It's a story that guides decision makers throught data, providng context and clarity.
Focusing on narrative flow, choosing the right visuals, and applying thoughtful design principles, you can create dashboards that not only present data but also inspire action.

When done right, dashboards become powerful tools that allow businesses to make smarter, faster decisions based on insights that are easy to understand and follow.